Have you ever set out to learn or experience one thing, but ultimately learned and experienced many other things, too? Because that’s what happened when I tried to grow oyster mushrooms during 2014. Eventually, I was a father to some mushrooms (picture below), but I also had to be their protector, particularly protecting them from molds.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="6" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/stFQQCRIAv/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">From this morning</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Brandon Hall (@tenkabuto) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2014-09-09T00:20:06+00:00">Sep 8, 2014 at 5:20pm PDT</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

In the following paragraphs I will explain

1. What type of mushroom I grew and why I chose to grow it versus another type of mushroom
2. What a mushroom is and how spores work 
3. What molds are and how they spread 
    1. And compare and contrast them with mushroom mycelium

“Oyster” mushrooms are called such because they look like an oyster shell (click here for a [picture of them](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pleurotus_ostreatus_JPG7.jpg#mediaviewer/File:Pleurotus_ostreatus_JPG7.jpg "'Pleurotus ostreatus JPG' by voir ci-dessous")). I chose to grow oyster mushrooms because they are widely considered to be the easiest mushroom to grow, which made them perfect for a beginner like me[^coffee-grounds], are non-hallucinogenic (not illegal), and they taste great!

[^coffee-grounds]: And they grow fairly well on used coffee grounds, which I have much access to.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="6" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/toQCO4xINB/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">Mycelium!</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Brandon Hall (@tenkabuto) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2014-10-01T23:49:30+00:00">Oct 1, 2014 at 4:49pm PDT</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

“Mushrooms are the fruit of the mushroom plant, the mycelium” (The Mushroom Cultivator, pp. 4).
Mycelium (shown in the photo above) is a network of cells that break down organic material to get to its nutrients and energy.
Why do they break down organic material? Mushrooms are not plants as we usually think of plants:
    they do not depend on energy from the sun (they depend on nutrients and energy they gain by breaking down organic material, or previously living tissues),
    they do not take in carbon dioxide and emit oxygen --- instead, they but do the reverse: they take in oxygen and emit carbon dioxide ---,
    and they reproduce by creating and releasing spores.
“Mushrooms reproduce through spores that can travel great distances via water, by air, or by hitchhiking on other carriers” (Mycelium Running, pp. 127). 
Spores of mushroom mycelium are sexual, require maturing and pairing before they can grow into a mycelium that is able to reproduce and produce mushrooms. 
Unfortunately, this process is slow, and I wanted to get growing as soon as possible.

To speed up the process of producing mushrooms, I used some mycelium that was growing on top of some oyster mushrooms that we bought from Sprouts.
This allowed me to bypass the slow maturation phase and begin growing more mycelium almost instantly.

Unfortunately, things started to go wrong fast, as molds also started appearing near my mycelium (note the black dots in the photo below).

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="6" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/qPFjsmxIEj/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">A shot of another area of the black mold-contaminated container. #mycology #mushrooms #growyourownfood #nature</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Brandon Hall (@tenkabuto) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2014-07-09T15:42:45+00:00">Jul 9, 2014 at 8:42am PDT</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

Whenever I opened the jars that I was growing mycelium in, air got into the jars. That air likely contained spores, but the spores were from mold. This was an issue because mold has three advantages over my oyster mushroom mycelium: 

1. Their spores are able to reproduce asexually 
2. They grow fast 
    1. My mushrooms appeared 67 days after its mycelium was placed in my jars, 
    2. But the mold grew and spread, by producing additional spores, within days of first appearing in the jars
3. They are able to tolerate higher temperatures[^interview]

[^interview]: This was particularly an issue for me as the Sacramento region tends to be too warm for mushroom production --- which I learned from Joseph Shlaegel, one of the owners of the local mushroom farm [Simply Manna](http://simplymanna.com "Simply Manna"), during a phone interview that I conducted with him.

I was ultimately only able to harvest two small oyster mushrooms because the encroaching mold wiped out most of my jars of mycelium and I did not have the proper conditions for the mushrooms to emerge/grow out from the mycelium (fruit). I have not grown any additional mushrooms since this grow, but I am considering doing so, if I can establish the proper fruiting conditions in spite of Sacramento's climate.